vedaissarvāṇi karmāṇyaphalaparatayā varṇitānīti budhvā
tāni tvayyarpitānyeva hi samanucaran yāni naiṣkarmyamīśa |
mā bhūdvedairniṣiddhe kuhacidapi mana:karmavācāṃ pravṛtti-
rdurvarjaṃ cedavāptaṃ tadapi khalu bhavatyarpaye citprakāśe ||1||
vedai:-sarvāṇi karmāṇi-	by the Vedas all the rituals
aphala-paratayā	beyond their results
varṇitāni-iti budhvā	are described, so understanding
tāni tvayi-arpitāni-eva	all of them, to Thee dedicating only
hi samucaran	(may I) perform them
yāni naiṣkarmyam-īśa	(so that I) may achieve freedom from action O Lord!
mā bhūt-	may there not be
vedai:-niṣiddhe	by the Vedas forbidden (actions)
kuhacit-api	at all any
mana:-karma-vācām	by thought deed or speech
pravṛtti:-durvarjam-	inclination, if unavoidable
cet-avāptam	may they get
tat-api khalu	that also indeed
bhavati-arpaye	I will dedicate to Thee
citprakāśe	O Light of Consciousness!
Understanding that the rituals described in the Vedas are beyond their seeming results-oriented nature, I shall dedicate all such rituals that I perform, to Thee O Lord! And become free from the bondage of action. May I not, even by mistake, by thought deed or speech attempt to do what is forbidden by the Vedas. If any such action becomes unavoidable, that too I will dedicate to Thee alone, O The Glowing Light of Consciousness!
yastvanya: karmayogastava bhajanamayastatra cābhīṣṭamūrtiṃ
hṛdyāṃ sattvaikarūpāṃ dṛṣadi hṛdi mṛdi kvāpi vā bhāvayitvā |
puṣpairgandhairnivedyairapi ca viracitai: śaktito bhaktipūtai-
rnityaṃ varyāṃ saparyāṃ vidadhadayi vibho tvatprasādaṃ bhajeyam ||2||
ya:-tu-anya: karmayoga:-	that indeed the other (form of) ritualistic yoga
tava bhajanamaya:-tatra ca	(which is) of Thy devotion, there also
abhīṣṭa-mūrtiṃ	Thy form dear to me
hṛdyāṃ sattva-eka-rūpāṃ	in my heart, (the form) of pure Sattva
dṛṣadi hṛdi mṛdi	(in an image of) stone, in the heart, or of clay
kvāpi vā bhāvayitvā	or of any other material, invoking
puṣpai:-gandhai:-nivedyai:-	with flowers, incense and food offerings
api ca viracitai:	also making
śaktita: bhaktipūtai:-	according to my capacity, with pure devotion
nityaṃ varyāṃ saparyāṃ	everyday devoted worship
vidadhat-ayi vibho	performing O Lord!
tvat-prasādaṃ bhajeyam	Thy grace will seek
The other form of ritualistic Karma, (Aagama) where Thy devotion is propounded, following that, I will worship Thee everyday. The dear most pure Saatvic form of Thee I will invoke in my heart as an image of stone or clay or any other material and worship with offerings of flowers, incense and food, according to my capacity. O Lord! devotedly performing Thy worship, I will seek Thy grace.
strīśūdrāstvatkathādiśravaṇavirahitā āsatāṃ te dayārhā-
stvatpādāsannayātān dvijakulajanuṣo hanta śocāmyaśāntān |
vṛttyarthaṃ te yajanto bahukathitamapi tvāmanākarṇayanto
dṛptā vidyābhijātyai: kimu na vidadhate tādṛśaṃ mā kṛthā mām ||3||
strī-śūdrā:-	women and people of lower castes
tvat-kathā-ādi-	Thy deed's narration etc.,
śravaṇa-virahitā:-	of hearing deprived (unprivileged)
āsatāṃ te dayārhā:-	may they be sympathised with
tvat-pāda-āsanna-yātān	to Thy feets' proximity reaching
dvijakula-januṣa: hanta	(those of) higher caste people, alas
śocāmi-aśāntān	I pity, (for) they are unpeaceful
vṛttyarthaṃ te yajanta:	(because) for a livelihood (they) perform Yagyaas
bahu-kathitam-api	in spite of being told many times
tvām-anākarṇayanta:	(they) to Thee (Thy teachings) do not hear (adhere to)
dṛptā: vidyā-abhijātyai:	arrogant (because of) learning and high birth
kimu na vidadhate	what (misdeeds) do they not do
tādṛśaṃ	like that
mā kṛthā mām	(Thou) may not make me
Women and people of the lower social order are unprivileged to hear the narrations of Thy deeds and excellences and for chanting Thy names. They are indeed to be pitied. But I bemoan the unpeaceful lot of people of the higher castes, who in spite of having all the facilities of worshipping Thee, would not do so being arrogant of their learning and high birth. In Thy teachings they have been repeatedly instructed about Thee, they perform Yagyaas as a livelihood and for material ends, and there is no misdeed that they do not do. O Lord! I pray, do not make me one like them.
pāpo'yaṃ kṛṣṇarāmetyabhilapati nijaṃ gūhituṃ duścaritraṃ
nirlajjasyāsya vācā bahutarakathanīyāni me vighnitāni |
bhrātā me vandhyaśīlo bhajati kila sadā viṣṇumitthaṃ budhāṃste
nindantyuccairhasanti tvayi nihitamatīṃstādṛśaṃ mā kṛthā mām ||4||
pāpa:-ayaṃ-kṛṣṇa-rāma-	wicked is this Krishna and Raama
iti-abhilapati	thus keeps saying
nijaṃ gūhituṃ duścaritraṃ	his own, to conceal misconduct
nirlajjasya-asya vācā	by this shameless person's prattles
bahutara-kathanīyāni me	very many things that I wanted to say
vighnitāni	are hindered (could not be said)
bhrātā me vandhyaśīla:	my brother is a hypocrite
bhajati kila sadā viṣṇum-	and worships indeed always Vishnu
itthaṃ budhān-te	in this manner, the wise devoted to Thee
nindanti-uccai:-hasanti	of them, speak spitefully and laugh loudly
tvayi nihita-matīn	in Thee absorbed are whose minds
tādṛśaṃ mā kṛthā mām	like that (those people) do not make me
Those worldly undevoted people laugh loudly at the wise people who are devoted to Thee with their minds absorbed in Thee. They speak spitefully of them with statements like -'This is a wicked fellow and keeps saying Krishna and Raama to conceal his misconduct. Because of this person's shameless prattles, I could not say many important things. My brother is an hypocrite and feigns to worship Vishnu all the time.' O Lord! Do not make me like them.
śvetacchāyaṃ kṛte tvāṃ munivaravapuṣaṃ prīṇayante tapobhi-
stretāyāṃ sruksruvādyaṅkitamaruṇatanuṃ yajñarūpaṃ yajante |
sevante tantramārgairvilasadarigadaṃ dvāpare śyāmalāṅgaṃ
nīlaṃ saṅkīrtanādyairiha kalisamaye mānuṣāstvāṃ bhajante ||5||
śveta-cchāyaṃ kṛte	white and lustrous in Krita Yuga
tvāṃ munivaravapuṣaṃ	Thou, in the form of a sage
prīṇayante tapobhi:-	propitiated by meditating men
tretāyāṃ	in the Treta Yuga
sruk-sruva-ādi-aṅkitam-	Sruka and Sruva etc., bearing marks
aruṇa-tanuṃ	with a red body
yajñarūpaṃ yajante	(Thou) in the form of Yagya,are offered sacrifices
sevante tantra-mārgai:-	worship as per Taantric rites
vilasat-ari-gadaṃ	adorning sword and mace
dvāpare śyāmala-aṅgam	in the Dwaapara Yuga, (Thee as) the light blue bodied
nīlaṃ saṅkīrtana-ādyai:-	(Thee) with blue (complexion) by chanting (Thy names) etc.,
iha kali-samaye	here in the Kali Yuga
mānuṣā:-tvāṃ bhajante	people, Thee worship
In the Krita Yuga people propitiate Thee with penance, in the form of a lustrous white sage. In the Treta Yuga, people offer sacrifices to Thee in the form as the Yagya itself, red in complexion marked with Sruka and Sruva (the Yaagyic accessories). According to the Taantric rites and rituals, in the Dwaapara Yuga, people worship Thee with a blue complexion resplendent with mace and discus etc. In this Kali Yuga Thou with a blue complexion are worshipped by people, with the chanting of Thy various names.
so'yaṃ kāleyakālo jayati muraripo yatra saṅkīrtanādyai-
rniryatnaireva mārgairakhilada na cirāttvatprasādaṃ bhajante |
jātāstretākṛtādāvapi hi kila kalau sambhavaṃ kāmayante
daivāttatraiva jātān viṣayaviṣarasairmā vibho vañcayāsmān ||6||
sa:-ayaṃ kāleya-kāla:	that this is the Kali Yuga Kaala
jayati muraripo	may it be victorious, O Slayer of Mura!
yatra saṅkīrtana-ādyai:-	where by chanting etc., only
niryatnai:-eva mārgai:-	without effort, alone, ways
akhilada na cirāt-	O Fulfiller of All Desires! Without delay
tvat-prasādaṃ bhajante	Thy grace is achieved
jātā:-tretā-kṛt-ādau-api	(those) born in Treta Krita etc also
hi kila kalau	indeed in Kali
sambhavaṃ kāmayante	to be born, desire
daivāt-tatra-eva jātān	fortunately, therein only born (we)
viṣaya-viṣa-rasai:-	by sensuous poisonous sense enjoyments
mā vibho vañcaya-asmān	Do not, O Lord! Deprive us
O Slayer of Mura! That this Kali Yuga may be victorious, wherein by chanting Thy various names and glories alone Thy grace is achieved effortlessly and in no time. O Fulfiller of All Desires! Those born in Treta Krita Dwaapara also desire to be born indeed in Kali Kaala. Fortunately, those of us who are born now, in Kali, may we not O Lord! be deprived of Thy grace, because of the pursuit of poisonous sensuous sense enjoyments.
bhaktāstāvatkalau syurdramilabhuvi tato bhūriśastatra coccai:
kāverīṃ tāmraparṇīmanu kila kṛtamālāṃ ca puṇyāṃ pratīcīm |
hā māmapyetadantarbhavamapi ca vibho kiñcidañcadrasaṃ tva-
yyāśāpāśairnibadhya bhramaya na bhagavan pūraya tvanniṣevām ||7||
bhaktā:-tāvat-kalau	devotees, then, in Kaliyuga
syu:-dramila-bhuvi	will be in Dravid land
tata:-bhūriśa:-	from them most
tatra ca-uccai::	and there are also, largely (in areas of)
kāverīṃ tāmraparṇīm-	(the rivers) Kaaveri, Taamraparni,
anu kila kṛtamālāṃ	and then indeed Kritmaalaa
ca puṇyāṃ pratīcīm	towards the holy west
hā mām-api-	Oh! me also
etat-antarbhavam-api	in this area born only
ca vibho	and O Lord!
kiñcit-añcat-rasaṃ tvayi-	somewhat devotion to Thee (having)
āśā-pāśai:-nibadhya	in the ropes of desire, binding
bhramaya na bhagavan	delude, do not O God!
pūraya tvat-niṣevām	make complete, towards Thee my devotion
In the Kali Yuga devotees will abound, mostly in the Dravid land, i.e., South India. In the regions of the rivers Kaaveri, Taamraparni and the Kritamaalaa, the holy west, the devotees will be more. Oh Lord! I too am born in this region only, and have some devotion to Thee. O God! I pray, do not delude me by binding me with ropes of desire, and do make my devotion to Thee complete.
dṛṣṭvā dharmadruhaṃ taṃ kalimapakaruṇaṃ prāṅmahīkṣit parīkṣit
hantuṃ vyākṛṣṭakhaḍgo'pi na vinihatavān sāravedī guṇāṃśāt |
tvatsevādyāśu siddhyedasadiha na tathā tvatpare caiṣa bhīru-
ryattu prāgeva rogādibhirapaharate tatra hā śikṣayainam ||8||
dṛṣṭvā dharmadruhaṃ taṃ	seeing the enemy fo Dharma, him
kalim-apakaruṇaṃ	Kaliyug the merciless Kali
prāk-mahīkṣit parīkṣit-	once the king Pareekshit
hantuṃ vyākṛṣṭa-khaḍga:-api	to kill, drew his sword also
na vinihitavān	(but) did not kill (Kali)
sāravedī guṇa-aṃśāt	the knower of the essence of Truth, (Kali) having some good
tvat-sevā-ādi-	worship of Thee etc.,
āśu-siddhyet-	will bring results soon,
asat-iha na tathā	evil here, will not in the same manner (bring results)
tvat-pare ca-eṣa bhīru:-	to Thy devotees and he (Kali) is afraid
yat-tu prāk-eva	because, before that only (firm devotion)
roga-ādibhi:-apaharate	by disease etc., he takes away
tatra hā	here (for this) Oh!
śikṣaya-enam	do punish him
Once king Pareekshit saw the merciless Kali who is the enemy of Dharma (righteousness), and to kill him, he drew his sword also. But he did not kill Kali, because Kali is a knower of the essence of Truth, and also because it has some good features. In Kali, Thy worship bears results very soon where as evil deeds take time to bring fruits. Kali is also afraid of Thy devotees, so he tries to take them away by disease etc., even before their devotion becomes firm. For this O Lord! punish him.
gaṅgā gītā ca gāyatryapi ca tulasikā gopikācandanaṃ tat
sālagrāmābhipūjā parapuruṣa tathaikādaśī nāmavarṇā: |
etānyaṣṭāpyayatnānyapi kalisamaye tvatprasādapravṛddhyā
kṣipraṃ muktipradānītyabhidadhu: ṛṣayasteṣu māṃ sajjayethā: ||9||
gaṅgā gītā ca	Gangaa (the river Ganges) Geetaa (the holy text)
gāyatrī-api ca	Gaayatri (Gaayatri Mantra) also
tulasikā	Tulsikaa (the holy plant)
gopikā candanaṃ tat	and that Gopikaa chandana (sandal paste)
sālagrāma-abhipūjā	Saalagraam (Vishnu's icon) worship
parapuruṣa	O Supreme Lord!
tathā-ekādaśī	and Ekaadashi (the fast on the eleventh day of the fortnight)
nāmavarṇā:	(and) chanting of Thy names
etāni-aṣṭa-api	these eight also
ayatnāni-ayi	are effortless, O Thou!
kali-samaye	in the time of Kali Yuga
tvat-prasāda-pravṛddhyā	by Thy grace in abundance
kṣipraṃ-mukti-pradānī-iti-	quickly liberation gives, thus
abhidadhu:-ṛṣaya:-	have clearly stated the sages
teṣu māṃ sajjayethā:	in these (eight), make me devoted completely
O Supreme Lord! In this Kali Yuga, Gangaa, Geetaa, Gaayatri, Tulsika, Gopichandana, Saalagraama worship, Ekaadashi fast and chanting of Thy names, these eight, the sages say, are quick and effortless means of salvation as they secure Thy abounding grace. O Thou! May I be intensely devoted to them all.
devarṣīṇāṃ pitṛṇāmapi na puna: ṛṇī kiṅkaro vā sa bhūman |
yo'sau sarvātmanā tvāṃ śaraṇamupagatassarvakṛtyāni hitvā |
tasyotpannaṃ vikarmāpyakhilamapanudasyeva cittasthitastvaṃ
tanme pāpotthatāpān pavanapurapate rundhi bhaktiṃ praṇīyā: ||10||
devarṣīṇāṃ	of the gods (sages)
pitṛṇām-api	of the Pitris (Manes) also
na puna: ṛṇī	will not again be debtor
kiṅkara: vā sa	a servant or he
bhūman	O Lord of the Universe!
ya:-asau sarvātmanā	whoever wholeheartedly
tvāṃ śaraṇam-upagata:-	in Thee refuge has taken
sarva-kṛtyāni hitvā	abandoning all actions
tasya-utpannaṃ vikarma-api-	by him done misdeeds also
akhilam-apanudasi-eva	all of them are destroyed even
citta-sthita:-tvaṃ	by Thee residing in his heart
tat-me pāpa-uttha-tāpān	that by my sins' borne sufferings
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
rundhi bhaktiṃ praṇīyā:	remove and generate devotion
O Lord of the Universe! Who so ever, whole heartedly takes refuge in Thee, abandoning all actions, is no longer a debtor to the gods or sages, Pitris (or Manes), or a servant to them. Even if he has done any misdeeds, they are destroyed by Thee who do reside in his heart. O Lord of Guruvaayur! my sufferings, born of my sins, do remove and generate devotion in me.